Networking tutorial: Java browser client (#59)
leaningtech/labs.leaningtech.com: src/content/docs/cheerpj3/13-examples/04-java-browser.mdx

---

> title: Java Browser (Networking)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Swing Browser (Networking)
```
Saying "Java" is useless since we already know everything CheerpJ is Java

description: Run a Java application with Internet connection
---

> In this tutorial, we will take you step by step on how to use CheerpJ and Tailscale to run a simple Browser client application written in Java. This tutorial aims to give a basic understanding of how to set wider internet access to a Java application that runs with CheerpJ.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial will show you how to use CheerpJ and Tailscale to run a web browser application written in Java. The same approach can be used to give any application running in CheerpJ wider internet access.
```

> If you are not familiar with how CheerpJ and Tailscale work together, we invite you to take a look at our [Networking guide].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're not familiar with how CheerpJ and Tailscale work together, [read the networking guide][Networking guide].
```

## Pre-requisites

> - Download the application JAR [here](/cheerpj3/examples/SwingHTMLBrowser.jar)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Download `SwingHTMLBrowser.jar`](/cheerpj3/examples/SwingHTMLBrowser.jar)
```

- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/) (>= 18)
- A simple HTTP server to host your page locally.
- A text editor to create and edit an HTML file.
- A modern browser like Chrome, Firefox or Safari.
- A Tailscale account (explanation later in this tutorial)

## 1. The Java application

Let's start by reviewing the Java application we will be testing. This is a simple Swing HTML browser written in Java. You can run this JAR locally if you have Java installed on your machine, but feel free to skip this step.

> Functionality is simple, type the full URL of a website in the input field (e.g. `https://www.github.com/`) and press enter to load the page. This is a very basic example so the website will not render as in a modern browser but you will be able to see the hypertext.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can type the full URL of a website in the input field and press enter to load the page. Note that the Swing web browser is fairly old, so sites may not display the same as in modern browsers.
```

> <table>

Reviewer: Using a table for layout isn't the best- better to use a flex row that wraps on small widths. And don't hardcode the image widths

	<tr>
		<td>

> 			<img src="/cheerpj2/assets/tinybrowser.png" width="350"></img>

Reviewer: Why are these assets in cheerpj2?

Author: I have the same question. I saw a bunch of mixed assets there so I continued with the trend. I can re-organise this :)

Author: I will re-organise this in a separate PR once both tutorials are merged.

		</td>
		<td>
			<img src="/cheerpj2/assets/tinybrowserloaded.png" width="344"></img>
		</td>
	</tr>
</table>

> In this scenario, the page is loading because the machine you are running this application on has an active connection to the internet and Java OpenJDK is installed.

Reviewer: The user can have a non-OpenJDK JRE

> ## 2. Running the application in the browser with CheerpJ

Reviewer: Other tutorials use present tense
```suggestion
## 2. Run the application in the browser with CheerpJ
```

Now we want to run this Java application in the browser with CheerpJ with no Java installation on your machine! To do so, we will follow similar steps as in the [Run a Java app] tutorial.

### 2.1 The project files

Let's create a project directory, place the application JAR in this folder and create an HTML file. Your project directory should look something like this:

```
└──browserTutorial
    ├── SwingHTMLBrowser.jar
    └── browser.html
```

Copy and paste this code in your `browser.html` file:

```html title="browser.html" {6, 9-15}
<!doctype html>
<html lang="en">
	<head>
		<meta charset="utf-8" />
		<title>Browser</title>
		<script src="https://cjrtnc.leaningtech.com/3.0rc2/cj3loader.js"></script>
	</head>
	<body>
		<script>
			(async function () {
				await cheerpjInit();
				cheerpjCreateDisplay(800, 600);
				await cheerpjRunJar("/app/SwingHTMLBrowser.jar");
			})();
		</script>
	</body>
</html>
```

#### What's going on?

> - The `<head>` script loads CheerpJ.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The script tag in the `<head>` loads CheerpJ.
```

- [`cheerpjInit`] initialises the CheerpJ runtime environment.
- [`cheerpjCreateDisplay`] creates a graphical environment to contain all Java windows.

> - [`cheerpjRunJar`] executes your application!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`cheerpjRunJar`] executes the application.
```

- `/app/` is a [virtual filesystem] mount point that references the root of the web server this page is loaded from.

> ### 2.2 Let's run the application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 2.2 Serving the application
```

> You can now serve this web page on a simple HTTP server, such as the http-server utility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now serve this page from an HTTP server, such as [http-server](https://npm.im/http-server).
```

```shell

> http-server -p 8080

Reviewer: ```suggestion
npx http-server -p 8080
```

```

You will be able to see the page in a modern browser running with CheerpJ. Let's type `https://github.com` in the Java browser client and press enter. Nothing will load and you will find this error in the console log:

<img src="/cheerpj2/assets/errorconsolelog.png"></img>

Now try loading a page that is hosted on the local server. Let's add the following file to the project directory:

```html title="hello.html"
<!doctype html>
<html lang="en">
	<head>
		<meta charset="utf-8" />
		<title>Hello world</title>
	</head>
	<body>
		<h1>Hello from the same origin!</h1>
	</body>
</html>
```

In the Java browser application type the following address: `http://127.0.0.1:8080/hello.html` (or any address that corresponds to your local host).

<img src="/cheerpj2/assets/hello_sameorigin.png" width="600"></img>

> ### What's happening until this point?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> CheerpJ can only do same-origin requests when is not connected to a Tailscale Network. The convenience of this scenario is that, even when the app is running in the browser, it is completely isolated from the wider internet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**CheerpJ can only do same-origin requests when is not connected to a Tailscale Network.** The convenience of this scenario is that, even when the app is running in the browser, it is completely isolated from the wider internet.
```
Unsure about second sentence

> ... But our application is a browser client, so we want it to have access to the Internet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
...but we want the application to be able to load web pages that aren't on localhost.
```

> ## 3. Connecting the application to the internet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 3. Connect the application to the internet
```

The easiest way to grant your application access to the internet is via a Tailscale network (_Tailnet_ in Tailscale terminology). A Tailscale network is a VPN made of machines/users (_Nodes_ in Tailscale terminology) connected to this network.
A Tailscale network by default is isolated from the internet, so it is necessary to configure an _exit node_ that routes all the internet traffic in and out of your VPN.

> ### 3.1 Setting up Tailscale

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 3.1 Set up Tailscale
```

Creating a network with an _exit node_ is very simple:

1.  Create an account and log in to the [Tailscale portal](https://login.tailscale.com/).
2.  [Install Tailscale](https://tailscale.com/kb/installation) in your machine, you will be configuring this machine as an _exit node_ later.
3.  Set up your machine as an _exit node_ following the instructions [here](https://tailscale.com/kb/1103/exit-nodes).

### 3.2 Authenticate your Java application

> It is essential to understand that a Java application running in the browser with CheerpJ needs to be connected and authenticated to the Tailscale network. Let's try by creating a pre-authenticated auth key:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Connecting to a Tailscale network requires an authorization key.
```

1. Generate an auth key [here](https://login.tailscale.com/admin/settings/keys) We recommend creating an _ephemeral_ one-time use auth key for this tutorial.
2. Copy your key and pass it to CheerpJ via [`cheerpjInit`] and [`tailscaleAuthKey`] by modifying your `browser.html` as follows:

```js
await cheerpjInit({

> 	tailscaleAuthKey: "PasteYourKeyHere",

Reviewer: highlight this line
